rāme'tha gokulagate pramadāprasakte
hūtānupetayamunādamane madāndhe |
svairaṃ samāramati sevakavādamūḍho
dūtaṃ nyayuṅkta tava pauṇḍrakavāsudeva: ||1||
rāme-atha	Thou (when) Balaraam
gokula-gate	had gone to Gokul
pramadā-prasakte	with the damsels sporting
hūta-anupeta-	when called , not coming
yamunā-damane	Yamunaa to subdue
madāndhe	intoxicated (Balaraam)
svairaṃ samāramati	at will sporting around
sevaka-vād-mūḍha:	subordinate's advice misled by
dūtaṃ nyayuṅkta	messenger sent
tava	to Thee
pauṇḍraka-vāsudeva	Paundraka Vaasudeva
Then when intoxicated Balaraam was sporting happily and at will with the damsels, he called over Yamuna to him. When Yamuna did not comply to his wishes he subdued her by turning her course. At that time Paundraka Vaasudeva misled by the ill advice of his subordinates, sent a messenger to Thee.
nārāyaṇo'hamavatīrṇa ihāsmi bhūmau
dhatse kila tvamapi māmakalakṣaṇāni |
utsṛjya tāni śaraṇaṃ vraja māmiti tvāṃ
dūto jagāda sakalairhasita: sabhāyām ||2||
nārāyaṇa:-aham-	Naaraayana am I
avatīrṇa iha-asmi bhūmau	descended here have I on earth
dhatse kila tvam-api	bear indeed you also
māmaka-lakṣaṇāni	my emblems
utsṛjya tāni	abandon them
śaraṇaṃ vraja mām-iti	surrender take unto me, thus
tvāṃ dūta: jagāda	to Thee the messenger said
sakalai:-hasita:	while every one laughed
sabhāyām	in the assembly
I am Naaraayana and have descended here on this earth. It seems you too bear my emblems. Abandon them and surrender unto me.' Thus the messenger said to Thee to the amusement of all in the assembly.
dūte'tha yātavati yādavasainikaistvaṃ
yāto dadarśitha vapu: kila pauṇḍrakīyam |
tāpena vakṣasi kṛtāṅkamanalpamūlya-
śrīkaustubhaṃ makarakuṇḍalapītacelam ||3||
dūte-atha yātavati	the messenger, when had departed
yāvada-sainikai:-tvaṃ	with the Yaadava army Thou
yāta: dadarśitha	went and saw
vapu: kila pauṇḍrakīyam	the body indeed of Poundraka
tāpena vakṣasi	by heat on the chest
kṛta-aṅkam-	was made a mark
analpa-mūlya-	not of little cost
śrī kaustubhaṃ	Shri Kaustubha
makara-kuṇḍala	fish shaped ear ornaments
pīta-celam	(and) yellow silk garment
After the messenger had departed, Thou went with the Yaadava army to the capital of Paundraka. There Thou saw the ridiculous form of Paundraka's body marked by a burnt sign (representing Srivatsa) an invaluable gem round his neck (representing the Kaustubha) and wearing also fish shaped ear ornaments and a yellow silk garment.
kālāyasaṃ nijasudarśanamasyato'sya
kālānalotkarakireṇa sudarśanena |
śīrṣaṃ cakartitha mamarditha cāsya senāṃ
tanmitrakāśipaśiro'pi cakartha kāśyām ||4||
kāla-āyāsaṃ	of black iron
nija-sudarśanam-	his own Sudarshana
asyata:-asya	throwing, his
kāla-anala-utkara-	cosmic fire sparks
kireṇa sudarśanen	emitted by the Sudarshana
śīrṣam cakartitha	(his) head cut off
mamarditha ca asya senāṃ	and crushed his army
tat-mitra-kāśipa-	his friend Kaashi's
śira:-api cakartha	head also cut off
kāśyām	(and sent) into Kaashi
Paundraka threw his own Sudershana made of black iron at Thee. Thou then cut off his head by Thy Sudarshana which was emitting sparks of cosmic fire, and crushed his army. Thou also cur off the head of his friend Kaashi and hurled it into Kaashi itself.
jālyena bālakagirā'pi kilāhameva
śrīvāsudeva iti rūḍhamatiściraṃ sa: |
sāyujyameva bhavadaikyadhiyā gato'bhūt
ko nāma kasya sukṛtaṃ kathamityaveyāt ||5||
jālyen	due to stupidity
bālaka-girā-api	by immature words even
kila-aham-eva	indeed I only (am)
śrī-vāsudeva iti	Shree Vaasudeva, thus
rūḍhamati:-ciraṃ sa:	firmly believing for long he
sāyujyam-eva	union (with Thee) only
bhavat-aikya-dhiyā	with Thee oneness by thinking
gata:-abhot	attained
ka: nāma	who indeed (knows)
kasya sukṛtaṃ	whose good deeds
katham-iti-aveyāt	in which way (come about), knows
It may be due to stupidity or due to believing the immature words of young people that Paundraka for long firmly believed in his mind that he himself was indeed Vaasudeva. This thought made him constantly be in oneness with Thee and so he attained Saayujya (union with Thee). Who knows whose good deeds lead him where and to what credit?
kāśīśvarasya tanayo'tha sudakṣiṇākhya:
śarvaṃ prapūjya bhavate vihitābhicāra: |
kṛtyānalaṃ kamapi bāṇraraṇātibhītai-
rbhūtai: kathañcana vṛtai: samamabhyamuñcat ||6||
kāśī-īśvarasya	Kaashi king's
tanaya:-atha	son then
sudakṣiṇa-ākhya:	Sudakshina by name
śarvaṃ prapūjya	Shankara worshipping well
bhavate vihita-	in The performed
abhicāra:	black magic
kṛtyā-analaṃ	Krityaa fire
kam-api	some (fierce and evil)
bāṇa-raṇa-ati-bhītai:-	in Baana's battle very frightened
bhūtai: kathañcana vṛtai:	by those Bhootas somehow followed by
samam-abhyamuñcat	with them released
Then the son of the king of Kaashi, called Sudakshina fervently worshipped Shankara. He performed black magic on Thee and released an evil fierce fire named Krityaa. He also somehow mobilised the Bhootas who were frightened during the battle Thou fought with Baana.
tālapramāṇacaraṇāmakhilaṃ dahantīṃ
kṛtyāṃ vilokya cakitai: kathito'pi paurai: |
dyūtotsave kimapi no calito vibho tvaṃ
pārśvasthamāśu visasarjitha kālacakram ||7||
tāla-pramāṇa-caraṇām-	palm trees like long legged
akhilaṃ dahantīṃ	everything burning
kṛtyāṃ vilokya	Krityaa seeing
cakitai:	by the frightened
kathita:-api paurai:	Thou being informed even by citizens
dyūta-utsave	in the dice game
kim-api no calita:	in the least not moving
vibho tvaṃ	O Lord Thou!
pārśvastham-āśu	placed near by immediately
visasarjitha	deployed
kāla-cakram	Sudarshana discus
The frightened citizens saw the Krityaa fire with long legs like palm trees burning everything and they informed Thee of this. Thou without stirring from Thy seat at the game of dice in which Thou were engrossed, deployed O Lord! Thy Sudarshana discus which was ready at hand.
abhyāpatatyamitadhāmni bhavanmahāstre
hā heti vidrutavatī khalu ghorakṛtyā|
roṣāt sudakṣiṇamadakṣiṇaceṣṭitaṃ taṃ
puploṣa cakramapi kāśipurīmadhākṣīt ||8||
abhyāpatati-	dashing
amita-dhāmni	the ever brilliant
bhavat-mahā-astre	Thy great weapon
hā hā-iti	oh oh thus shouting
vidrutavatī	running away
khalu ghora-kṛtyā	indeed the terrible Krityaa
roṣāt sudakṣiṇam-	in anger Sudakshina
adakṣiṇa-ceṣṭitaṃ taṃ	the impious actioned, him
puploṣa cakram-api	burnt down discus also
kāśi-purīm-adhākṣīt	the Kaashi city burnt down
Thy ever brilliant great weapon dashed towards Krityaa. The terrible Krityaa ran away shouting in distress and in anger burnt down the impious actioned Sudakshina himself. Thy Sudarshana discus in turn burnt down the city of Kaashi.
sa khalu vivido rakṣoghāte kṛtopakṛti: purā
tava tu kalayā mṛtyuṃ prāptuṃ tadā khalatāṃ gata: |
narakasacivo deśakleśaṃ sṛjan nagarāntike
jhaṭiti halinā yudhyannaddhā papāta talāhata: ||9||
sa khalu vivida:	he indeed Vividha
rakṣoghāte	in the Raakshasa's killing
kṛta-upakṛti: purā	had given help long ago
tava tu kalayā	by Thy part incarnation
mṛtyuṃ prāptuṃ	death to get
tadā khalatāṃ gata:	then to wickedness took
naraka-saciva:	Narakaasura's minister
deśa-kleśaṃ sṛjan	to public suffering causing
nagara-antike	near the town of Dwaarika
jhaṭiti halinā	immediately with Balaraama
yudhyan-addhā	fighting with ease
papāta-tala-āhata:	fell down hit by the palm
Long ago Vividha, the monkey who had helped Thee in killing the Raakshasas (during Thy incarnation as Raama) nursed the desire to be killed by Thy part incarnation. As a minister of Narakaasura, he took to evil ways and started creating sufferings for the people in the vicinity of Dwaarika. In a fight with Balaraama, he was killed with ease by a blow of Balaraam's hand in no time.
sāmbaṃ kauravyaputrīharaṇaniyamitaṃ sāntvanārthī kurūṇāṃ
yātastadvākyaroṣoddhṛtakarinagaro mocayāmāsa rāma: |
te ghātyā: pāṇḍaveyairiti yadupṛtanāṃ nāmucastvaṃ tadānīṃ
taṃ tvāṃ durbodhalīlaṃ pavanapurapate tāpaśāntyai niṣeve ||10||
sāmbaṃ	Saamba (who was)
kauravya-putrī-haraṇa-	(due to) Kuru's daughter's abducting
niyamitaṃ	in captivity
sāntvanā-arthī	to pacify
kurūṇāṃ yāta:-	the Kurus went
tat-vākya-roṣa-	by their talks enraged
uddhṛta-karinagara:	lifted up Hastinaapur
mocayāmāsa rāma:	(and) released (Saamba) Balaraam
te ghātyā:	they, the Kurus should be killed
pāṇḍaveyai:-iti	by the Paandavas, thus
yadu-pṛtanāṃ	the Yadu army
na-amuca:-tvaṃ tadānīṃ	did not send Thee, then
taṃ tvāṃ durbodhalīlaṃ	that Thou of unfathomable sportings
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
tāpa-śāntyai niṣeve	for the sufferings to be removed (I) worship
Saamba was a captive of the Kurus because he had abducted their daughter. Balaraam went to the Kurus to pacify them but was enraged by their talks and lifted up Hastinaapur and released Saamba. Thou did not send the Yaadava army to confront them, because Thou wanted that the Kurus be killed by the Paandavas. Thou whose sporting ways are unfathomable, O Lord of Guruvaayur! I worship Thee so as to remove my sufferings.